Art stories - Slavín
Shortly after the Second World War arose the idea to build a monument in Bratislava
for the fallen soldiers of the Red Army.
One which could compete with the Castle by their very dominance
and would be visible from the main roads into the city.
Back in the 19th century, maybe even earlier,
(Alexandra Kusá – Director of the Slovak National Gallery)
during the Slovak National Revival and the Slovak Brotherhood,
when they tried to devise rituals and mythologies,
they came up with the idea of Slavín as a place where all Slavic heroes would go after death.
Slavín is very specific name for something which pertains to Slavs
and has a mythological character and which naturally involves funeral rites.
The preparation for what Slavín should look like was carried out in several stages.
Naturally, it was necessary to act immediately after the war,
because it is not only a memorial but also a cemetery and it has various functions.
What is very interesting is to see how the process became more and more political.
The memorial was increasingly becoming some sort of affirmation of the Soviet influence on Czechoslovakia,
which became reality only in 1948, but precisely this memorial extended the influence back to 1945.
In 1953 was issued the invitation to tender, in which participated several leading architects of the time.
Part of their proposals was inclusion of sculptures of many other famous artists:
Tibor Bártfay,
Ján Kulich,
Jozef Kostka,
Ladislav Snopek,
Alexander Trizuljak
and others...
The art of Socialist realism was announced as the aim of our national cultural policy in 1948,
but the change in architecture unsurprisingly takes some time.
This is why the tender kept getting prolonged as everyone kept anxiously waiting for what exactly will Social realism be.
This was the spirit of the proposed projects of the architects,
who were more used to working in the modernist style.
The tender was won by Ján Svetlík and his vertical conception of sleek pylon
topped with a statue of a soldier raising a flag.
The author of this central statue is Alexander Trizuljak.
The concept is based on the statue of Archangel Michael on Castel Sant'Angelo in Rome.
It depicts a soldier flying a flag, which is the symbol of victory,
who is stepping on the swastika.
The statue expands into space in its perspective.
If we saw the statue on the eye level, it would seem disproportionately wide in shoulders and head area.
(Klement Trizuljak – Alexander Trizuljak's Son)
This widening in perspective foreshortening
ensured proportional perception.
The statue itself was enormous in size,
eleven-meter tall figure plus the flag,
which required cooperation with a structural designer.
It was necessary to build an internal structure which could carry the weight of the clay piled onto the model.
When my father saw the pipes and profiles and the way they were welded together,
he gained inspiration for his next work,
as if he jumped straight into Modernism.
(Eva Trizuljaková –Alexander Trizuljak's Wife)
He did a welding course and then he began welding himself.
This was the period in the 1960s and 1970s,
when everyone was scandalized by what that Trizuljak made.
Modernists didn’t accept him among them because he used to be part of the Socialist realism movement.
My father was never a member of the Communist Party,
he worked his way up to his position purely by his efforts.
His area and his space was this professional engagement.
After this period of artistic boom and prominent social standing came the Occupation in 1968,
in April further lessons from the crisis development and thus began the period of Normalization.
They used so-called religious argument against my father;
as a person who 'hasn't come to terms with the religious issues',
he cannot teach at the Academy of Fine Arts and Design.
Those times very horribly deformed by the political situation.
Everyone took care to be friendly with the right people because your career was entirely dependant on politics.
Many people took him for a communist flunky,
even though he never was, and the Communists themselves never respected him.
One of the legends is that it represents the letter D for Deus.
When you look at the silhouette, there is a particular outline.
Another outline is B for Boh – God.
When we asked father, because other people were also asking question, he always denied it.
People from the Christian community were accusing him
that the tower on the Calvary Church in Bratislava was pulled down because of Slavín.
This is untrue - the cause was definitely the pressure from the Party organs and bypassing of the approval of the then Bishop Ambróz Lazík.“
His deputy, who was installed in that position by the Party, gave his approval in the absence of the Bishop.
The tower on the Church was pulled down on the basis of this deception.
Another story, also untrue, says that my father declared in 1968 that if he knew that Russian occupation forces would come,
he would have never built the monument.
However, my father used to say that those are two separate issues.
The sacrifice of those people nevertheless remains.
Those people deserve this honour.
The monument was finished on 4th April 1960
on the occasion of the 15th anniversary of the Liberation of Bratislava in such form as we know it today.
Besides being popular spot for romantic meetings,
Slavín is an important architectural piece of work of the post-war Slovakia,
uniting the art of Modernism with the art of Socialist realism.